Blog Post: Array Libraries Interoperability (#255)
Quansight-Labs/quansight-labs-site: posts/2021/09/array-libraries-interoperability.md

operates on them. This enables using NumPy as a high level API for
efficient multi-dimensional array operations, even with array implementations
that differ greatly from `numpy.ndarray`.

I suggest reading the [NEP](https://numpy.org/neps/nep-0018-array-function-protocol.html)
itself for detailed understanding, but I'll try to expound the motivation
with a simple example taken from [this](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HVLPJnvInzM)
insightful talk by [Dr. Ralf Gommers](https://github.com/rgommers)
at PyData Amsterdam.

```python
import numpy as np
import cupy

def some_func(x):
    return np.log(np.sin(x) + 5)

x = np.random.random((100000, 100000))

some_func(x)  # Runs on CPU, might be slow

# Now can we use some_func with CuPy arrays
# designed to work on NVIDIA GPUs and are
# faster at parallelized matrix operations.

x_cupy = cupy.array(x)

# NEP 18 enables this possibility
some_func(x_cupy) # Runs on GPU, orders of magnitude fast
```

Since NEP 18, there have been a few other protocols like
[NEP 35](https://numpy.org/neps/nep-0035-array-creation-dispatch-with-array-function.html),
[NEP 37](https://numpy.org/neps/nep-0037-array-module.html) endeavouring to

> address some of the issues and shortcomings with NEP 18.

Reviewer: would be good to point out that these NEPs were not actually accepted/implemented

**For the sake of brevity in this blog,
we'll limit our focus to [NEP 31 or `uarray`](https://uarray.org/en/latest/)
and [NEP 47 or Array API (`__array_namespace__`)](https://numpy.org/neps/nep-0047-array-api-standard.html). These are some of the most recent protocols
with a goal to ameliorate interoperability shortfalls.**

## Array API or NEP 47

Before I start describing Python Array API in the context of this blog,
I urge you to read:

1. [Announcing the consortium](https://data-apis.org/blog/announcing_the_consortium/)
2. [First release of the Array API Standard](https://data-apis.org/blog/array_api_standard_release/) 

> These two official blogs from the [Consortium for Python Data API Standards](https://data-apis.org/) describe the protocol, giving a high level overview of its existence.

Reviewer: I'd say it's an API standard rather than a protocol

Reviewer: A protocol is any concrete API with associated semantics, like `__array_function__` or `__dlpack__`.

Author: Got it!

> Let's see how the use of Array API might look in practice.

Reviewer: Array API -> this array API

```python
import torch as xp
# or
import numpy.array_api as xp

a = xp.arange(3)
b = xp.ones(3)

c = a + b
``` 

Technically, the only changes involved for a NumPy end user to port their
code in PyTorch would be to update the import statement and refactor
`np.` -> `xp.`. Here `xp` represents any array provider library

> compliant with the Array API. Doing something like this is duck soup

Reviewer: duck soup?

Author: Rephrased the sentence.

compared to some other array interoperability protocols taking a much more
convoluted approach.

A couple of the concrete use cases mentioned in the [Array API Spec](https://data-apis.org/array-api/latest/use_cases.html#concrete-use-cases) are:

* Use case 1: add hardware accelerator and distributed support to SciPy
* Use case 2: simplify einops by removing the backend system

With the introduction and compliance of Array API in all the major
array/tensor libraries, consumer libraries will be able to support more
than one "array provider" and become truly interoperable.

Since we started by talking about consumer libraries like SciPy, let's
continue with the same example. We've built a [demo](https://anirudhdagar.ml/array-api-demo/intro.html) around Array API showcasing the use of PyTorch Tensors with

> Scipy.

Reviewer: SciPy

first function to be called inside any SciPy method. One can see how it works
below, simply returning the namespace, which can be used later for calling any
Array API specified methods.

```python
def get_namespace(*xs):
    # `xs` contains one or more arrays, or possibly Python scalars (accepting
    # those is a matter of taste, but doesn't seem unreasonable).
    namespaces = {
        x.__array_namespace__() if hasattr(x, '__array_namespace__') else None for x in xs if not isinstance(x, (bool, int, float, complex))
    }

    if not namespaces:
        # one could special-case np.ndarray above or use np.asarray here if
        # older numpy versions need to be supported.
        # This can happen when lists are sent as an input, for eg. some
        # SciPy functions coerce lists into ndarrays internally.
        raise ValueError("Unrecognized array input")

    if len(namespaces) != 1:
        raise ValueError(f"Multiple namespaces for array inputs: {namespaces}")

    xp, = namespaces
    if xp is None:
        raise ValueError("The input is not a supported array type")

    return xp

def csd(x, y, fs=1.0, window='hann', nperseg=None, noverlap=None, nfft=None,

> 	detrend='constant', return_onesided=True, scaling='density', axis=-1,

Reviewer: nit: aliging keywords on the opening bracket would look better

	average='mean'):
    # Array-API
    xp = get_namespace(x, y)

    # Library Independent Code
    # Call Array API specified methods
    some_internal_calculation = xp.some_func(x)
    ...
```

This should be possible with the Array API, for the end-user in a
future release of SciPy and PyTorch. I'd encourage you to read
more details on the [demo](https://anirudhdagar.ml/array-api-demo/intro.html)

> page itself.

Reviewer: I would also expect some conclusions here, for example: _"We made SciPy plus PyTorch work for this very much nontrivial use case, which demonstrates feasibility and power of the approach. There are of course some issues we ran into, namely .... - those are all addressable and we expect that to happen within the next year."_

> 

Reviewer: There should be some text here about status of array API implementations, which then makes the transition in the text to your contributions to PyTorch smoother.

### Contributing to PyTorch

Interestingly in the process and effort to make PyTorch
more [Array API](https://data-apis.org/array-api/latest/) compatible,
I started contributing to PyTorch by raising PRs and relevant Issues.
My first PyTorch PR [#62560](https://github.com/pytorch/pytorch/pull/62560)
started with adding an alias `torch.concat` for `torch.cat` which is
how concatenation is defined in the [array api spec](https://data-apis.org/array-api/latest/API_specification/manipulation_functions.html?highlight=concat#concat-arrays-axis-0)
and ended with a bunch of other fixes related to concatenation in PyTorch.
Later, I worked on improving compatibility for Array API to the `torch.linalg`
module. See [pytorch/pytorch#63285](https://github.com/pytorch/pytorch/pull/63285)
and [pytorch/pytorch#63227](https://github.com/pytorch/pytorch/pull/63227).

You can track the progress on PyTorch's github repo with the label
["module: python array api"](https://github.com/pytorch/pytorch/labels/module%3A%20python%20array%20api) to check out other interesting developments.

 

> ## uarray

Reviewer: This transition is also not very smooth. What would help a lot is further up explain that for pure Python + NumPy code you use the array API standard, while for compiled code like `fft`, `ndimage`, `special` there is a need for array library & hardware specific implementations, and hence from SciPy we need to be able to access and use those. Which is where uarray comes in.

I've been working on adding uarray backend support to more SciPy modules. 

<p align="center">
	<a href="https://github.com/scipy/scipy/issues/14353">
	<img alt="SciPy: uarray compatibility tracker" src="/images/2021/09/uarray_compatibility_tracker.png">
    <i>SciPy: uarray compatibility tracker</i>
    </a>
</p>

The uarray backend compatibility tracker issue linked above sums up
the plan and current state of uarray in SciPy.

Precisely I've been working on adding uarray support in the
[`scipy.ndimage`](https://github.com/scipy/scipy/tree/master/scipy/ndimage) module
for the last couple of months.
See [scipy/scipy#14356](https://github.com/scipy/scipy/pull/14356) for more
details on the discussions.

With the `ndimage` supporting `uarray` backend soon, one would be able to
achieve the following in the future:

```python
# SciPy ndimage with CuPy array
from scipy import ndimage
import cupy as cp
 
with scipy.ndimage.set_backend('cupy'):
    y_cupy = ndimage.correlate1d(cp.arange(10),
                                 cp.array([1, 2.5]))
```

The [work](https://github.com/scipy/scipy/pull/14356) on adding `uarray`
backend in `ndimage` is slightly complicated and

> involved a few other maintainace fixes in SciPy. In case you are interested,

Reviewer: typo in "maintenance"

> I'll leave a list of some notable SciPy contributions below which are directly

Reviewer: "some of my notable"

or indirectly connected to uarray.

* [scipy/scipy#14275](https://github.com/scipy/scipy/pull/14275)
* [scipy/scipy#14359](https://github.com/scipy/scipy/pull/14359)
* [scipy/scipy#14447](https://github.com/scipy/scipy/pull/14447)
* [scipy/scipy#14474](https://github.com/scipy/scipy/pull/14474)
* [scipy/scipy#14266](https://github.com/scipy/scipy/issues/14266)

---

## All ☀️ & 🌈?

As they say, nothing is perfect on the human stage, both uarray and
Array API also have their limitations.

\*\*\*_Wears interoperability hat again_\*\*\*

> Let's highlight some Pros & Cons for these two protocols.

Reviewer: This actually explains a lot, like where uarray comes in. Regarding my other comment about making the transition smoother: you can do that early on in the blog post, and then forward-link to this section for a more detailed explanation.

---

## What's Next?

I've absolutely enjoyed the Scientefic Python Open-Source community and plan
to continue working on projects including SciPy and PyTorch voluntarily
going forward.

More specifically, I plan to work on improving interoperability with other
libraries in PyTorch with Python Array API compliance, which is aimed for a
release in `1.11` and also improving NumPy support. There are a lot of
interesting gaps that are to be filled in the `OpInfo` testing module and in
general trying to catch a few bugs through the improved testing framework.
With the recent migration to `Structured Kernels`, I also plan to help out
with porting of some Ops to `structured`.

PyTorch is a project that I really love and have been a user for a long time,
it is always nice to be contributing back to the project and learning along
the way. I'm open to contributing to other interesting areas that might
arise in the future.

In SciPy, I aim to continue adding and improving uarray backend support
for more modules. This also extends work into libraries like `CuPy`, `Dask` etc.
where the uarray backend needs to be enabled.

Apart from uarray, I'd also like to explore and contribute to a few more

> intersting tracks revolving around making SciPy more performant.

Reviewer: typo in "interesting"

<!--
.. title: Array Libraries Interoperability
.. slug: array-libraries-interoperability
.. date: 2021-09-20 17:04:54 UTC-05:00
.. author: Anirudh Dagar
.. tags: SciPy, PyTorch, NumPy, CuPy, uarray, Array API
.. category: 
.. link: 
.. description: 
.. type: text
.. previewimage: /images/2021/09/ninja_arrays.png
-->

In this blog post I talk about the work that I was able to accomplish during
my internship at Quansight Labs and the efforts being made towards making
array libraries more interoperable.

Going ahead, I'll assume basic understanding of array and tensor libraries
with their usage in the Python Scientific and Data Science software stack.

<p align="center">
	<img alt="Ninja Turtles Array Libraries" src="/images/2021/09/ninja_arrays.png">
    <i>Old Ninja Turtle NumPy and young Tensor Turtles</i>
</p>

<!-- TEASER_END -->

## Array Provider & Consumer Libraries

As someone who's been involved in the Data Science domain for more than four
years now, I can't think of any of my projects without using an array/tensor
library. Over time, NumPy (more than 15 years old today) has become a blind
import before starting any Python project involving manipulation of arrays.

> Quite recently with the Deep Learning buzz, more and more libraries have been

Author: Rephrased the whole paragraph a little, let me know if sounds more complete.

developed with some extra sweetness on top of the NumPy like `nd-array`
computation functionality. Namely this extra sweetness is the multi-device

> (`CPU`, `GPU`, `XLA` etc.) support and autograd engine for the array/tensor

Author: Slightly rephrased this. I believe N-dimensional arrays is more common and slightly compact. Also goes well with the "ndarray" instead of "multi-dimensional" array. Both are correct of course.

at PyData Amsterdam.

```python
import numpy as np
import cupy

def some_func(x):
    return np.log(np.sin(x) + 5)

x = np.random.random((100000, 100000))

some_func(x)  # Runs on CPU, might be slow

# Now can we use some_func with CuPy arrays
# designed to work on NVIDIA GPUs and are
# faster at parallelized matrix operations.

x_cupy = cupy.array(x)

# NEP 18 enables this possibility
some_func(x_cupy) # Runs on GPU, orders of magnitude fast
```

Since NEP 18, there have been a few other protocols like
[NEP 30](https://numpy.org/neps/nep-0030-duck-array-protocol.html#nep30),
[NEP 35](https://numpy.org/neps/nep-0035-array-creation-dispatch-with-array-function.html)
and
[NEP 37](https://numpy.org/neps/nep-0037-array-module.html) endeavouring to
address some of the issues and shortcomings with NEP 18. Note that these NEPs
were actually never accepted or implemented.

**For the sake of brevity in this blog,
we'll limit our focus to [NEP 31 or `uarray`](https://uarray.org/en/latest/)
and [NEP 47 or Array API (`__array_namespace__`)](https://numpy.org/neps/nep-0047-array-api-standard.html). These are some of the most recent protocols

> with a goal to ameliorate interoperability shortfalls.**

Author: Don't have any strong opinions here, but I'll just remove the bold text and keep it normal. It looks weird in italics.

## Array API or NEP 47

Before I start describing Python Array API in the context of this blog,
I urge you to read:

1. [Announcing the consortium](https://data-apis.org/blog/announcing_the_consortium/)
2. [First release of the Array API Standard](https://data-apis.org/blog/array_api_standard_release/) 

These two official blogs from the [Consortium for Python Data API Standards](https://data-apis.org/) describe the API, giving a high level overview of its existence.

Let's see how the use of this Array API might look in practice.

```python
import torch as xp
# or
import numpy.array_api as xp

a = xp.arange(3)
b = xp.ones(3)

c = a + b
``` 

> Technically, the only changes involved for a NumPy end user to port their
> code in PyTorch would be to update the import statement and refactor
> `np.` -> `xp.`. Here `xp` represents any array provider library

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Probably the only changes involved for a NumPy end user to
support PyTorch would be to update the import statements and refactor
`np.*` to `xp.*`. Here `xp` represents *any* array provider library
```
```

compliant with the Array API. Doing something like this is extremely easy as
compared to some other array interoperability protocols taking a much more
convoluted approach.

> A couple of the concrete use cases mentioned in the [Array API Spec](https://data-apis.org/array-api/latest/use_cases.html#concrete-use-cases) are:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Array API spec mentions a couple of [concrete use cases](https://data-apis.org/array-api/latest/use_cases.html#concrete-use-cases) are:
```

* Use case 1: add hardware accelerator and distributed support to SciPy
* Use case 2: simplify einops by removing the backend system

With the introduction and compliance of Array API in all the major
array/tensor libraries, consumer libraries will be able to support more
than one "array provider" and become truly interoperable.

Since we started by talking about consumer libraries like SciPy, let's
continue with the same example. We've built a [demo](https://anirudhdagar.ml/array-api-demo/intro.html) around Array API showcasing the use of PyTorch Tensors with
SciPy.

<p align="center">
	<a href="https://anirudhdagar.ml/array-api-demo/intro.html">

> 	<img alt="Array API Prototype" src="/images/2021/09/array_api_demo_screenshot.png">

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
	<img alt="Screenshot of the demo's website" src="/images/2021/09/array_api_demo_screenshot.png">
```

    <i>Array API Demo</i>
    </a>
</p>

The [Array API Demo](https://anirudhdagar.ml/array-api-demo/intro.html) walks
you through the details and processes involved to make an array consumer library
like SciPy more interoperable with array provider libraries. The demo is built

> keeping two different perspectives in mind, one that of an end user and the other
> of an open-source developer/maintainer looking to incorporate and use Array API

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to keep two different perspectives in mind: an end user, and
an open-source developer/maintainer looking to incorporate use of the Array API
```

Author: With this line, I'm trying to say: "With these two different perspectives in mind, we've built the demo."
It's not the other way round. Basically, the demo is built to show two mindsets, one that of the user and the other of the maintainer.

I'm not super sure if your suggestion means exactly the same.

Reviewer 2: Ahh I shouldn't of replaced "keeping" to "to keep".
```suggestion
keeping two different perspectives in mind: an end user, and
an open-source developer/maintainer looking to incorporate use of the Array API
```
Does this look better? I *think* I understood what you mean, this was meant to just help readability :sweat_smile:

Author: Yeah this looks good. Thanks for the quick update.

    }

    if not namespaces:
        # one could special-case np.ndarray above or use np.asarray here if
        # older numpy versions need to be supported.
        # This can happen when lists are sent as an input, for eg. some
        # SciPy functions coerce lists into ndarrays internally.
        raise ValueError("Unrecognized array input")

    if len(namespaces) != 1:
        raise ValueError(f"Multiple namespaces for array inputs: {namespaces}")

    xp, = namespaces
    if xp is None:
        raise ValueError("The input is not a supported array type")

    return xp

def csd(x, y, fs=1.0, window='hann', nperseg=None, noverlap=None, nfft=None,
		detrend='constant', return_onesided=True, scaling='density', axis=-1,
		average='mean'):
    # Array-API
    xp = get_namespace(x, y)

    # Library Independent Code
    # Call Array API specified methods
    some_internal_calculation = xp.some_func(x)
    ...
```

This should be possible with the Array API, for the end-user in a
future release of SciPy and PyTorch.

We made SciPy plus PyTorch work for this very much nontrivial use case,

> which demonstrates feasibility and power of the approach. There are of

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
which demonstrates the feasibility and power of using the Array API. There are of
```

> course some issues we ran into, namely

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
course some issues we ran into, namely:
```

> - Lack of Array API standards on complex numbers in the upcoming 2021 version

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- A lack of Array API standards on complex numbers in the upcoming 2021 version
```

and started my journey as a PyTorch contributor.

### Contributing to PyTorch

Interestingly in the process and effort to make PyTorch
more [Array API](https://data-apis.org/array-api/latest/) compatible,
I started contributing to PyTorch by raising PRs and relevant Issues.
My first PyTorch PR [#62560](https://github.com/pytorch/pytorch/pull/62560)
started with adding an alias `torch.concat` for `torch.cat` which is
how concatenation is defined in the [array api spec](https://data-apis.org/array-api/latest/API_specification/manipulation_functions.html?highlight=concat#concat-arrays-axis-0)
and ended with a bunch of other fixes related to concatenation in PyTorch.
Later, I worked on improving compatibility for Array API to the `torch.linalg`
module. See [pytorch/pytorch#63285](https://github.com/pytorch/pytorch/pull/63285)
and [pytorch/pytorch#63227](https://github.com/pytorch/pytorch/pull/63227).

As mentioned earlier, you can track the progress on PyTorch's github repo with
the label
["module: python array api"](https://github.com/pytorch/pytorch/labels/module%3A%20python%20array%20api) to check out other interesting developments.

> ### What's Missing?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### What's missing?
```

Author: I personally like headings to be started with caps unless it is a very long heading. Not sure if there is a convention. If everyone feels that we need to be dramatically correct with caps at the start of the heading only, I can use these suggestions.

Not too rigid on this, just a matter of personal preference. :P

	  	multiple "array providers".
	  </li>
	  <li>
	  	One can make use of the consumer library functions without thinking
	    about any form of backend registration etc.
	  </li>
	</ul>
  	<p align="left">
		<b>Cons</b>
	</p>
	<ul>
	  <li>
	  	Can't handle compiled code, works only for pure python and array provider 
	  	based code in consumer library methods.
	  </li>
	  <li>
	  	Not all functions are covered in the Array API Spec, which may be a blocker
	  	if the consumer library method utilizes a function outside of Array API's
	  	scope.
	  </li>
	</ul>
  </div>
</div>

These protocols may not be perfect, but, are a big step towards interoperable
science and bringing the array tensor libraries ecosystem closer together.
We'll see iterations and development of new NEPs in the future which will probably
make array libraries even more interoperable. In essence, open-source communities like
NumPy putting interoperability as one of the key goals in their
[roadmap](https://numpy.org/neps/roadmap.html#interoperability) and
the larger scientific community taking small steps in the right direction is
ultimately progress towards the ideal world of interoperable science.

---

> ## What's Next?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## What's next?
```

Author: Same as above.

are directly or indirectly connected to uarray.

* [scipy/scipy#14275](https://github.com/scipy/scipy/pull/14275)
* [scipy/scipy#14359](https://github.com/scipy/scipy/pull/14359)
* [scipy/scipy#14447](https://github.com/scipy/scipy/pull/14447)
* [scipy/scipy#14474](https://github.com/scipy/scipy/pull/14474)
* [scipy/scipy#14266](https://github.com/scipy/scipy/issues/14266)

---

<h2 id="protocol_differences"> All ☀️ & 🌈?</h2>

As they say, nothing is perfect on the human stage, both uarray and
Array API also have their limitations.

\*\*\*_Wears interoperability hat again_\*\*\*

Let's highlight some Pros & Cons for these two protocols.

<style>
* {
  box-sizing: border-box;
}

.row {
  display: flex;
}

/* Create two equal columns that sits next to each other */
.column {
  flex: 50%;
  padding: 10px;
}
</style>

<div class="row">
  <div class="column">
  	<h2 align="center">
		<b>uarray</b>
	</h3>
  	<p align="left">
		<b>Pros</b>
	</p>
	<ul>
	  <li>
	  	Can handle compiled code (anything not Python but which ends up with
	  	Python bindings).
	  </li>
	  <li>
	  	Supports ability to coerce/convert inputs and wrapping other arrays

> 	  	using __ua_convert__ protocol.

Author: Nice catch! Fixed it.

libraries in PyTorch with Python Array API compliance, which is aimed for a
release in `1.11` and also improving NumPy support. There are a lot of
interesting gaps that are to be filled in the `OpInfo` testing module and in
general trying to catch a few bugs through the improved testing framework.
With the recent migration to `Structured Kernels`, I also plan to help out
with porting of some Ops to `structured`.

PyTorch is a project that I really love and have been a user for a long time,
it is always nice to be contributing back to the project and learning along
the way. I'm open to contributing to other interesting areas that might
arise in the future.

In SciPy, I aim to continue adding and improving uarray backend support
for more modules. This also extends work into libraries like `CuPy`, `Dask` etc.
where the uarray backend needs to be enabled.

Apart from uarray, I'd also like to explore and contribute to a few more
interesting tracks revolving around making SciPy more performant.

* One of the GSoC students (Xingyu Liu) recently made a lot of progress in
accelerating some of the modules with the experimental Pythran support. It

> would be interesting to explore further possibilities with `Pythran`.

Author: Done!
